---
layout: content
title: Catalan Survival
logo: false
---

<h1> How Has Catalan Survived? </h1>

<p> There is a common misconception that Catalan is a dialect of Spanish. Catalan is not a dialect of any language but an independent Romance language that has been competing with Spanish for dominance over the Iberian Peninsula for over 1000 years. I will present the development of Catalan from its Latin origins, its continual struggle with Spanish for prominence, and its continued survival. 

It is estimated that today Catalan is spoken by about 9 million people in Spain, mainly in the region of Catalonia, and an additional 300,000 people outside of Spain (primarily throughout the Mediterranean). Furthermore, about 3,000,000 people in Spain speak Catalan as their second or third language, and 2 million more understand Catalan but are not able to speak it. 

Although Catalan is very closely related to Spanish and French it is most closely related to the Occitan language of Southern France. Catalan has retained many sounds that are no longer found in Spanish such as the ‘j’ pronounced [ʒ], and the ‘x’ pronounced [ʃ]. Catalan also differs from Spanish in that it has a lack of rising diphthongs as in the Catalan ‘be’ vs. Spanish ‘bien’. However, Catalan has falling diphthongs that do not appear in Spanish such as ‘eu’, ‘au’, and ‘ou’. Catalan also stresses certain verbs on the root, whereas in Spanish the infinitive ending is stressed (such as Catalan ‘VENdre’ vs. ‘Spanish venDER’). There are fewer differences between Catalan and Occitan: Catalan often uses different vowel and diphthong sounds than those used in Occitan, and has several different grammatical arrangements that are not found in Occitan.

Catalan developed from the Vulgar Latin spoken in the Roman province of Hispania Tarraconensis. In 778, After the fall of the Roman empire, the Franks, lead by Charlemagne, conquered a small region south of the Pyrenees, including the Roman-founded city of Barcelona. There, they established the Marca Hispanica (the Spanish March), a military buffer zone that acted as a defensive barrier from the Umayyad Moors (who had invaded the Iberian Peninsula in 711 AD) and from the Carolingian Empire (begun in 800 AD when Charlemagne was crowned emperor of the Romans).  The local proto-Romance languages of the Marca Hispanica, based on Latin, developed in close relation with the languages of Southern Gaul and the languages of the invading Moors. However, the languages of the Visigoths and Moors had a little impact on Catalan. Additionally, in spite of its proximity to Gaulish, Catalan never adopted the two-case declension system unique to Old French and Occitan.

In the 10th century, the Catalan counties of the Marca Hispanica came under the rule of the counts of Barcelona, who were Frankish vassals. It was then that these counties began to be known as ‘Catalonia’. The Catalan counties began to reconquer territory from the Moors and became progressively more independent from Frankish rule. During this time, the language of the Catalan counties began to develop away from the other proto-Romance languages of the surrounding regions. The prestige language, used by the upper classes in formal situations and in written documents, was still Latin. Catalan, however, was used in day-to-day life by all social classes, despite being considered the “low” language of the region. By the end of the 10th century, Catalan was considered an independent language, clearly distinct from Latin. The first appearance of a Catalan written document was in the second half of the 12th century: the Homilies of Organyà. 
In 1137, the kingdoms of Catalonia and Aragon were united through the marriage of Count Ramon Berengeur IV of Barcelona to queen Petronila of Aragon. This resulted in the monarchy known as the Crown of Aragon, although Catalonia retained its autonomy. Catalonia became the base of the maritime forces of the Crown of Aragon and made Catalonia powerful and wealthy. As the Crown of Aragon assumed the Kings of Valencia, Majorca, Sardinia, and Sicily, Catalan spread throughout the Mediterranean. By the beginning of the 13th century, Catalan had become the national language of pre-Spain. Catalan came to be spoken, even if not always as a first language, in the Mediterranean, that were governed by Catalan dynasties. Consequently, as the use of Latin declined, Catalan became the literary language and works originally written in Latin were translated into Catalan for distribution. Catalan literature flourished with the works of the philosopher Ramon Llull, the poet Ausias March, and the knight and author Joanot Martorell whose novel Tirant Lo Blanch influenced the authored Miguel De Cervantes. 
The marriage of Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabelle of Castile in 1469 marked the beginning of the unification of Spain. Isabelle and Ferdinand sought to unify the lands of the Iberian peninsula and to this end believed that a unified Spain required a single common language: Castilian. Catalonia, which remained an autonomous province, became the main target of this unification as the interests of Catalonia conflicted with the interests of Castile. While Catalan remained the "popular tongue" for many years, it gradually entered a period of decline and progressively became the language of the commoners while Castilian became the language of the court and literature. Following the War of the Spanish Succession from 1705 to 1715, King Philip V abolished the Generalitat de Catalunya, the autonomous government of Catalonia. The Royal government imposed restrictions on the use of Catalan in legislation, education, and trade, and Castilian became the official language of the Spanish kingdom. The use of Catalan declines and for the first time Castilian became the prestige language of the Iberian Peninsula. By the nineteenth century, nearly all educated people spoke Castilian habitually. 
However, the Catalan language did not disappear. During the Napoleonic wars in the 19th century there was a re-birth of Catalan as a result of an aim for national unity. For a brief period under Napoleonic rule, Catalan was made an official language along with Spanish as a propaganda measure to win Catalan support. Following this, there was a literary revival of Catalan attributed to the poem La Patria written by Buenaventura Carlos Aribau Farriola. In 1841, the first periodical in Catalan, called Lo Pare Arcangel, was published the Catalan, and the upper class began to revive early Catalan literature and to study and write new Catalan works. Catalan was reborn as the language of literature and culture in Catalonia through the poetry contest known as Jocs Florals (Floral Games). Important works in poetry, fiction, drama, and even in science, as well as newpapers and periodicals appeared in Catalan. As Catalan literature thrived, the use of the language itself grew. Catalonian once again became a language of habitual use in the region. This revival was followed by the development of a Catalan-speaking wealthy middle class who desired regional cohesion in Catalonia which ultimately led to a renaissance in Catalan arts and literature (Renaixença) in the late 19th century. Following rapid economic development of the region, a rising tide of nationalism (sometimes directed towards independence) gave new impulse to the development of the language. The Generalitat de Catalunya was re-established in 1931 and created Catalan schools at all levels, with Catalan textbooks and Catalan libraries.  The struggle for a regional identity through the use of their native tongue, continued to develop. Feelings toward Catalan were so strong that it was considered "unpatriotic" to speak Castilian. In order to eliminate the influences of Castilian on their language, many writers deliberately borrowed from French, imitating both its vocabulary and its syntax. 
During the Second Spanish Republic, which lasted from to 1931-1939, Catalan was restored to its official language status, but this promising development was checked by the Civil War and its consequences. After the Spanish Civil War, which occurred from 1936 to 1939, the victorious government, led by Francisco Franco, viewed Catalonia’s autonomy as a "threat to the integrity of Spain" and Castilianization again become the goal of the ruling class. The Franco government, which lasted from , abolished the regional government of Catalonia as well as Catalan-language schools and forbade the use of Catalan in books, periodicals, the radio, and in films. The Catalan language retreated back into the home.  For 40 years under the Franco dictatorship, Spain tried to present itself as an ethnically and politically homogenous state. Many material resources for the production and reproduction of Catalan culture were lost, and the Catalan language lost prestige in comparison with Spanish.  Many upper-class Catalans choose to speak Spanish over their native Catalan. The Institue d'Estudis Catalans lost its government support, and although it survived through donations from private citizens, much of Catalan printed work disappeared. Additionally, in the 1950s about two million people from the south of Spain immigrated into Catalonia. These migrants were often prejudiced against the Catalan language, not least because many of them did not even know about its existence before coming to Catalonia and thus some felt no need to learn Catalan. 

Despite the odds, most Catalan people went on using their language at home and Catalan has thus survived to this day. The Catalan government reports that over 90% of Catalonia’s residents can understand Catalan and 75% can speak and read Catalan fluently. How has this language been able to survive while so many other minority languages disappeared under Franco? First, we can look at legal protection. Catalan is now spoken as the official language of Catalonia (as well as in Valencia and the Balearic Islands) and is consequently protected by the Catalan state. Advertising in Catalonia is strictly published in Catalan. Through the media and advertising due to the fact that television companies such as TV3 and Televisió de Catalunya, belonging to the Catalan Corporation of Media, broadcast their output solely in Catalan. The channels themselves were founded by Generalitat of Catalonia (Euromosaic) and help politically arrange the autonomy of Catalonia as an entity. Concurrently, the curriculum delivered in schools and universities in Catalonia is also to be thanked for its never-failing contributions to the Catalan language. The Catalonian education system helps Catalan to survive by making Catalan compulsory in all Catalonian schools. Furthermore, Catalonia has its own government, parliament and executive council, which have a major impact in ensuring that the Catalan language thrives, and the region remains autonomous. 

With the death of Franco in 1975, Catalan politicians had an opportunity to take control of Catalonia and preserve its language and culture. The Catalan language has also gained protection from outside the Catalan state. On December 11, 1990, the European Parliament approved the "Resolution on the Situation of Languages in the Community and on the Catalan Language," recognizing the identity, current validity, and use of Catalan within the context of the European Union. Catalan is the 7th most spoken language in the EU. 
However, legal protection and enforced use of the Catalan language was only established in modern times and thus is not enough to explain how Catalan has survived. There is no exact answer for why Catalan has been able to survive despite hundreds of years of repression. I believe that the survival of Catalan can be most accredited to resistance towards Spain and Spanish dominance.  Even when repressed, Catalan was still spoken by lower classes at home, both as a way of life and as an act of subtle resistance, passing Catalan from generation to generation. When allowed, Catalan has always revived quickly, swiftly making its place within the middle and upper classes. During Catalans lowest period, the reign of Franco, Catalan again was condemned. Due to intense “Castilianization”, Catalan was removed from television, radio, and banned from literature. All governmental and commercial activities were strictly executed in Catalan and only Castilian legal document had legal status. The slogan “Si eres espanol, habla espanol”, was followed closely by Franco and his supporters. However, Catalan survived as a resistance language. Those who studied Catalan continued its legacy Catalan writers (even those who had been exiled) continued to write, although secretly, in Catalan. So, when the Franco regime fell, Catalan was ready and able to come back with full force. Within 3 years of Franco’s death in 1975, Catalan was recognized as a minority language in Spain and by 1982 Catalan was again an official language in Spain.  

Banning a language has unintended results. Speakers of a banned language naturally resist the oppression placed onto their culture and language, and with strong patriotic feelings, work to preserve their culture and language. In the case of Catalan, the Catalonians have been very successful in protecting their language despite hundreds of years of repression.  
</p>